Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: hepatic physiology.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss hepatic physiology. Outline the functions of the liver and its blood
supply.
The liver is the largest internal organ and the principal metabolic organ of the
body, with an extraordinary range of functions and a distinctive dual blood supply,
and an understanding of these is the foundation of the subject,
so it is worth setting out.
The liver performs a remarkable variety of functions, which may be grouped.
It is the central organ of metabolism: it handles the carbohydrate,
fat and protein metabolism — storing and releasing glucose to regulate the blood
glucose, synthesising and metabolising fats,
and synthesising most of the plasma proteins,
including albumin and the clotting factors.
It is the principal organ of detoxification and drug metabolism,
processing and eliminating drugs, hormones and waste products,
and producing urea from the nitrogen of protein breakdown.
It produces bile, important in fat digestion and as a route of excretion,
including of bilirubin. It stores various substances — glycogen, vitamins and iron.
And it has immune functions.
Its blood supply is distinctive and dual:
it receives blood from two sources — the hepatic artery,
bringing oxygenated arterial blood, about a fifth or so of the flow; and, uniquely,
the portal vein, bringing the venous blood draining from the gut,
which is the major part of the flow and which carries the absorbed nutrients from
the intestine directly to the liver to be processed first.
So the liver is the principal metabolic organ, handling carbohydrate,
fat and protein metabolism, synthesising the plasma proteins and clotting factors,
detoxifying and metabolising drugs and producing urea, secreting bile,
and storing nutrients; supplied by a distinctive dual blood supply — the hepatic
artery with oxygenated blood, and the portal vein bringing the nutrient-rich venous
blood from the gut to be processed first — the central metabolic organ,
of great relevance to anaesthesia through drug metabolism and its disorders.
Describe the metabolic functions of the liver.
The liver is the central organ of the body's metabolism,
occupying a key position in the handling of all the major nutrients,
and an understanding of its metabolic functions is essential,
so they are worth describing.
The liver, receiving the nutrient-rich blood from the gut,
is the body's central metabolic processing organ,
handling the three classes of nutrient.
In carbohydrate metabolism, it is central to the regulation of the blood glucose:
it takes up glucose after a meal and stores it as glycogen, and, between meals,
releases glucose — by breaking down its glycogen and by making new glucose,
gluconeogenesis — so maintaining the blood glucose,
under the control of the hormones insulin and glucagon.
In fat metabolism, it synthesises and processes fats and lipoproteins,
produces cholesterol, and, in fasting,
converts fat into ketone bodies as an alternative fuel.
In protein metabolism, it is the site of synthesis of most of the plasma proteins —
notably albumin, the main protein maintaining the plasma oncotic pressure,
and the clotting factors; and it handles the breakdown products of protein,
converting the ammonia from amino-acid metabolism, which is toxic, into urea,
which is excreted by the kidney.
So the liver synthesises, stores and breaks down as the metabolic needs require.
These functions explain the consequences of liver failure — the disturbances of
glucose, the low albumin, the bleeding from clotting-factor deficiency,
and the accumulation of ammonia.
So the liver is the central metabolic organ: in carbohydrate metabolism,
regulating the blood glucose by storing and releasing glucose; in fat metabolism,
synthesising and processing fats and making ketones; and in protein metabolism,
synthesising the plasma proteins — albumin and the clotting factors — and
converting toxic ammonia to urea; functions whose failure causes the disturbances
of glucose, the low albumin, the bleeding and the accumulation of ammonia — the
central role of the liver in metabolism.
Describe the role of the liver in drug metabolism.
The liver is the principal organ of drug metabolism,
and this is of central importance to anaesthesia,
since it determines the handling of many anaesthetic drugs and is altered in liver
disease, so it is worth describing.
The liver is the main site at which drugs and other foreign substances are
metabolised — chemically modified to facilitate their elimination.
The metabolism is classically described in two phases.
Phase one reactions modify the drug molecule — typically by oxidation,
often by the cytochrome P450 enzyme system,
a large family of enzymes central to drug metabolism.
Phase two reactions conjugate the drug, or its phase-one product,
with another molecule, making it more water-soluble and so more readily excreted.
The general effect is to convert lipid-soluble drugs,
which would otherwise be hard to eliminate,
into water-soluble products that the kidney can excrete;
usually this inactivates the drug, though sometimes it produces active or toxic
metabolites.
Several points are important to anaesthesia.
The liver's metabolism, with its blood flow,
determines the clearance of many drugs;
for drugs that are heavily extracted by the liver,
the clearance depends on the liver blood flow,
which anaesthesia and surgery can reduce.
The enzymes can be induced or inhibited by other drugs,
altering metabolism — a source of drug interactions.
And in liver disease, drug metabolism may be impaired,
so that drugs are cleared more slowly and their effects prolonged — requiring
caution in dosing.
So the liver is the principal organ of drug metabolism,
modifying drugs in phase one reactions — oxidation,
by the cytochrome P450 system — and phase two conjugation,
converting lipid-soluble drugs to excretable water-soluble products,
usually inactivating them; of central anaesthetic importance,
as it determines drug clearance — dependent on liver blood flow for
highly-extracted drugs — is subject to induction and inhibition causing
interactions, and is impaired in liver disease,
prolonging drug effects — the basis of hepatic drug handling.
Describe the formation and excretion of bile and the handling of bilirubin.
The liver produces bile, which is both essential for fat digestion and an important
route of excretion, notably of bilirubin,
and an understanding of bile and bilirubin handling is important,
including to the interpretation of jaundice, so it is worth describing.
Bile is produced continuously by the liver,
stored and concentrated in the gallbladder,
and released into the intestine when food arrives.
It has two roles: its bile salts are essential for the digestion and absorption of
fat, as discussed; and it is a route of excretion for substances the liver removes
from the blood, notably bilirubin, cholesterol and some drugs.
Bilirubin handling is particularly important.
Bilirubin is the waste product of the breakdown of haemoglobin from old red cells;
it is produced in an insoluble form,
carried in the blood bound to albumin — the unconjugated bilirubin.
The liver takes it up, and conjugates it,
making it water-soluble — the conjugated bilirubin — and excretes it into the bile,
and so into the gut, where it is further processed and eliminated,
giving the stool its colour.
A rise in the plasma bilirubin causes jaundice, the yellow discolouration;
and the pattern — whether the bilirubin is unconjugated or conjugated — helps to
localise the cause: an excess production or a failure of uptake and conjugation
giving unconjugated jaundice, while a failure of excretion,
as in obstruction of the bile ducts, gives conjugated jaundice.
So the liver produces bile — stored in the gallbladder,
its bile salts essential for fat digestion, and a route of excretion;
and it handles bilirubin, the waste of haemoglobin breakdown,
taking up the unconjugated bilirubin carried on albumin,
conjugating it to a water-soluble form, and excreting it in the bile to the gut;
a rise causing jaundice, whose pattern — unconjugated or conjugated — localises the
cause — the basis of bile and bilirubin handling and of jaundice.
Describe the consequences of liver disease relevant to anaesthesia.
Liver disease, by impairing the many functions of the liver,
has widespread consequences of considerable anaesthetic relevance,
and drawing these together follows directly from the liver's functions,
so it is worth describing.
Because the liver has so many functions, its failure has widespread effects,
each following from a lost function.
The impaired synthesis of proteins causes a low albumin — reducing the plasma
oncotic pressure, contributing to oedema,
and altering the protein binding of drugs — and a deficiency of clotting factors,
causing a coagulopathy with a bleeding tendency, important in surgery.
The impaired metabolism affects the blood glucose, with a risk of hypoglycaemia,
and the handling of drugs, which are metabolised more slowly,
so their effects are prolonged — requiring caution and reduced doses of anaesthetic
and sedative drugs.
The impaired detoxification allows the accumulation of substances, notably ammonia,
contributing to the disturbance of brain function — hepatic encephalopathy.
The disturbance of bilirubin causes jaundice.
Advanced liver disease, cirrhosis, causes further problems: portal hypertension,
with the risk of bleeding from varices, and ascites; and a disturbed circulation,
often hyperdynamic, with effects on the kidneys and lungs.
The combination makes the patient with significant liver disease a considerable
anaesthetic challenge — with the coagulopathy, the altered drug handling,
the cardiovascular and renal disturbances, and the encephalopathy.
So liver disease has anaesthetic consequences following from the lost functions:
a low albumin and a coagulopathy from impaired synthesis;
hypoglycaemia and prolonged drug effects from impaired metabolism;
encephalopathy from impaired detoxification with ammonia accumulation; jaundice;
and, in cirrhosis, portal hypertension with variceal bleeding and ascites and a
disturbed circulation — making the patient a considerable anaesthetic challenge,
following directly from the functions of the liver.
Describe the hepatic circulation and its regulation.
The liver has a large and distinctive blood flow,
with its dual supply and a degree of regulation,
of relevance to drug handling and to the effects of anaesthesia,
so the hepatic circulation is worth describing in a little more detail.
The liver receives a large blood flow — around a quarter of the cardiac output —
from its two sources.
The portal vein provides the major part,
around two-thirds to three-quarters of the flow; this blood, draining the gut,
is partly deoxygenated, having given up oxygen to the intestine,
but is rich in the absorbed nutrients.
The hepatic artery provides the remainder, well-oxygenated arterial blood.
Because the portal blood is partly deoxygenated,
the two sources contribute more equally to the liver's oxygen supply than to its
blood flow.
The blood from both perfuses the liver tissue and drains into the hepatic veins to
the inferior vena cava.
There is a degree of regulation: notably,
the hepatic artery can adjust its flow in response to changes in the portal flow —
increasing when the portal flow falls,
partly buffering the total — a reciprocal arrangement.
The flow is affected by many factors relevant to anaesthesia:
it is reduced by the fall in cardiac output and blood pressure,
by the sympathetic activation of stress, by some anaesthetic agents,
and by surgical manipulation and raised intra-abdominal or intrathoracic pressure.
The reduction in hepatic blood flow matters because it reduces the delivery of
oxygen to the liver — risking hepatic injury — and reduces the clearance of the
drugs whose elimination depends on the liver flow.
So the hepatic circulation is large — about a quarter of the cardiac output — and
dual: the portal vein providing most of the flow,
nutrient-rich but partly deoxygenated,
and the hepatic artery the well-oxygenated remainder,
the two contributing more equally to oxygen supply;
with a reciprocal regulation by which the artery buffers changes in portal flow;
the flow reduced by low cardiac output, sympathetic activation,
anaesthetic agents and surgical factors — a reduction impairing hepatic oxygenation
and the clearance of flow-dependent drugs — of relevance to anaesthesia.
Pull it together: why is the liver important to the anaesthetist?
I would draw the liver together around its position as the central metabolic organ,
whose many functions and distinctive circulation make it of great and varied
importance to the anaesthetist.
The liver is the body's principal metabolic and processing organ,
supplied by the nutrient-rich portal blood and the oxygenated arterial blood.
Its importance to the anaesthetist follows from its functions.
It is the principal organ of drug metabolism,
so it determines the handling of many anaesthetic drugs — a clearance that,
for highly-extracted drugs, depends on the hepatic blood flow,
which anaesthesia and surgery can reduce; and that is impaired in liver disease,
prolonging drug effects and requiring caution.
It synthesises the clotting factors and albumin,
so its disease causes a coagulopathy,
important in surgery and regional anaesthesia,
and a low albumin altering drug binding. It regulates the blood glucose,
so its failure risks hypoglycaemia.
It detoxifies, so its failure causes the accumulation of ammonia and
encephalopathy. Its circulation is large and vulnerable to reduction by the
haemodynamic changes of anaesthesia and surgery, risking hepatic injury.
And advanced liver disease brings the further challenges of portal hypertension,
varices, ascites and a disturbed circulation.
So the patient with liver disease is a considerable anaesthetic challenge.
So the liver is important to the anaesthetist as the central metabolic organ:
determining the metabolism and clearance of many anaesthetic drugs — flow-dependent
and impaired in disease; synthesising the clotting factors and albumin,
so its disease causes coagulopathy and altered drug binding;
regulating glucose and detoxifying,
so its failure causes hypoglycaemia and encephalopathy;
with a large circulation vulnerable to the haemodynamics of anaesthesia; and,
in advanced disease, the challenges of portal hypertension and a disturbed
circulation — a central organ of varied and great anaesthetic importance.
You mentioned the liver's dual blood supply.
How is total hepatic blood flow regulated,
and what is the hepatic arterial buffer response?
Total hepatic blood flow is about one and a half litres per minute,
a quarter of the resting cardiac output.
Roughly seventy per cent arrives by the portal vein,
which is post-capillary blood from the gut and spleen, already partly deoxygenated,
and thirty per cent by the hepatic artery;
because the arterial blood is fully saturated,
the two sources contribute about equally to oxygen delivery.
Portal flow is not directly autoregulated — it is determined by the splanchnic
arteriolar tone upstream, and so falls with mesenteric vasoconstriction in shock or
with sympathetic stimulation.
The hepatic artery, by contrast, shows the hepatic arterial buffer response:
when portal flow falls, adenosine, which is washed out more slowly,
accumulates around the resistance vessels and causes hepatic arterial
vasodilatation, increasing arterial flow to offset the loss.
The reverse occurs when portal flow rises. This buffer can compensate for only part
of a fall, perhaps a quarter to a half,
and it is impaired by anaesthesia and by cirrhosis.
The liver also acts as a blood reservoir,
holding up to half a litre that can be mobilised by sympathetic venoconstriction in
haemorrhage.
So hepatic flow is large, dually sourced, and protected by an arterial buffer,
but that protection is limited and is eroded by both anaesthesia and disease.
Describe the metabolism of bilirubin, and use it to classify jaundice.
Bilirubin is the breakdown product of haem,
mostly from senescent red cells degraded by the reticuloendothelial system.
Haem is converted by haem oxygenase to biliverdin and then to unconjugated
bilirubin, which is lipid-soluble, not water-soluble,
and is carried in plasma bound to albumin;
in this form it cannot be excreted in urine.
It is taken up by the hepatocyte and conjugated with glucuronic acid by the enzyme
UDP-glucuronyl transferase to form water-soluble conjugated bilirubin,
which is secreted into bile.
In the gut, bacteria convert it to urobilinogen and stercobilin,
giving stool its colour; some urobilinogen is reabsorbed and excreted renally.
This pathway lets us classify jaundice.
Pre-hepatic jaundice, from excess haemolysis,
raises unconjugated bilirubin with normal liver enzymes and no bilirubin in urine.
Hepatic, or hepatocellular, jaundice from parenchymal disease raises both fractions
with high transaminases.
Post-hepatic, or obstructive, jaundice from a blocked biliary tree raises
conjugated bilirubin, which spills into urine darkening it,
with pale stools and a high alkaline phosphatase.
So tracing one molecule from haem to bile lets us localise the lesion from a simple
set of blood and urine findings.
The liver is central to drug handling. Explain hepatic clearance and the concept of
the extraction ratio.
Hepatic clearance is the volume of blood cleared of drug per unit time,
and it depends on three variables expressed in the well-stirred model:
hepatic blood flow, the intrinsic clearance of the enzymes,
and the fraction of drug unbound in plasma.
The extraction ratio is the proportion removed in a single pass, from zero to one.
Drugs separate into two useful groups.
High-extraction drugs, with a ratio above about point-seven — propofol, lidocaine,
morphine, glyceryl trinitrate — are removed so avidly that the limit is how fast
blood delivers them; their clearance is flow-limited,
falls when hepatic flow falls, and they show a large first-pass effect that reduces
oral bioavailability.
Low-extraction drugs, with a ratio below about point-three — diazepam, warfarin,
phenytoin — are limited instead by enzyme capacity and protein binding;
their clearance is capacity-limited,
sensitive to enzyme induction or inhibition and to changes in binding,
but relatively insensitive to flow.
This framework predicts behaviour in disease: in cirrhosis,
reduced flow and shunting most affect high-extraction drugs and raise oral
bioavailability dramatically, while reduced enzyme mass most affects
capacity-limited drugs.
So whether a drug is flow- or capacity-limited tells us what will change its
clearance, and we dose accordingly.
What are the synthetic functions of the liver, and what happens when they fail?
The liver synthesises almost all the plasma proteins.
Chief among them is albumin, about ten to fifteen grams a day,
which maintains plasma oncotic pressure and binds drugs, hormones,
bilirubin and fatty acids; its long half-life of about twenty days means the
albumin level reflects chronic rather than acute function.
The liver also makes the clotting factors — all except factor eight and von
Willebrand factor — including the vitamin-K-dependent factors two, seven,
nine and ten, and the anticoagulant proteins C and S;
because factor seven has the shortest half-life, the prothrombin time, or INR,
is an early and sensitive marker of synthetic failure.
It produces fibrinogen, complement, acute-phase proteins,
transport proteins such as transferrin and caeruloplasmin,
and plasma cholinesterase.
When synthetic function fails, the consequences follow directly:
hypoalbuminaemia causes oedema and altered drug binding;
coagulopathy with a prolonged INR causes bleeding,
though this is rebalanced as I shall explain;
reduced cholinesterase prolongs suxamethonium;
and reduced acute-phase and complement proteins impair the response to infection.
So the liver is the body's protein factory,
and the INR and albumin together give a quick clinical read on its output over
short and long timescales.
How does the liver maintain glucose homeostasis?
The liver is the principal organ of glucose buffering,
and it does so in three ways. In the fed state, under insulin,
it takes up glucose and stores it as glycogen — glycogenesis — holding around
eighty to a hundred grams, and converts excess to fat.
In early fasting, under glucagon and adrenaline,
it breaks glycogen down — glycogenolysis — releasing glucose to keep the blood
level constant; this store is sufficient for only about twenty-four hours.
In prolonged fasting it manufactures new glucose — gluconeogenesis — from lactate,
glycerol and glucogenic amino acids,
becoming the main source of circulating glucose.
The liver is uniquely able to release free glucose because it possesses
glucose-six-phosphatase, which other tissues lack.
It also clears lactate by the Cori cycle and produces ketone bodies from fatty
acids as an alternative fuel in starvation.
The anaesthetic relevance is direct: patients with liver failure,
and small children with limited glycogen stores,
are prone to fasting hypoglycaemia and need glucose monitoring and often a dextrose
infusion perioperatively, while the stress response to surgery drives
hyperglycaemia through these same pathways.
So the liver smooths the supply of glucose between meals and during stress,
and its failure removes that buffer in both directions.
Tell me about the liver's role in nitrogen handling and the urea cycle,
and link it to encephalopathy.
Protein metabolism generates ammonia, which is highly neurotoxic,
both from deamination of amino acids in the liver and from bacterial breakdown of
nitrogenous substances in the gut, absorbed into the portal blood.
The liver detoxifies ammonia by the urea cycle,
an energy-dependent series of reactions confined largely to periportal hepatocytes,
converting two molecules of ammonia and one of carbon dioxide into urea,
which is water-soluble, non-toxic and excreted by the kidney.
The liver also incorporates ammonia into glutamine.
When hepatocellular function fails,
or when portal blood is shunted past the liver in portal hypertension,
ammonia and other gut-derived toxins reach the systemic circulation and the brain,
producing hepatic encephalopathy — a spectrum from subtle cognitive change through
confusion and asterixis to coma, associated with cerebral oedema in acute failure.
Precipitants include gastrointestinal bleeding,
which delivers a protein load to the gut, infection, constipation,
electrolyte disturbance and sedatives.
Management targets the ammonia source:
lactulose to acidify the bowel and trap ammonium,
and rifaximin to reduce the producing flora.
The anaesthetic caution is profound sensitivity to sedatives and a real risk of
precipitating coma.
So the urea cycle is the liver's detoxification of nitrogen,
and its failure or bypass underlies a defining complication of liver disease.
What non-metabolic functions does the liver perform — for instance immune and
storage roles?
Beyond metabolism, the liver has important immune, reservoir and storage functions.
Lining the sinusoids are Kupffer cells,
the largest population of fixed tissue macrophages in the body,
perfectly placed to filter portal blood arriving directly from the gut;
they phagocytose bacteria, endotoxin, and old red cells, and present antigen,
forming a critical barrier between gut flora and the systemic circulation.
Their failure or bypass contributes to the endotoxaemia and susceptibility to
sepsis seen in liver disease. The liver stores several nutrients:
glycogen as discussed; vitamin A, with very large reserves; vitamin B-twelve;
and iron as ferritin.
It is the site of activation of vitamin D to its twenty-five-hydroxy form,
and it produces thrombopoietin, the regulator of platelet production,
which is why thrombocytopenia accompanies cirrhosis.
It also acts as a blood reservoir, holding up to half a litre that can be
autotransfused by sympathetic venoconstriction during haemorrhage.
The hepatic and splanchnic beds together hold a large fraction of the blood volume.
So the liver is not only a chemical factory but a filter, a store and a reservoir,
and several features of liver disease — sepsis risk, low platelets,
vitamin deficiency — trace back to these roles.
Define portal hypertension and outline its consequences.
Portal hypertension is a sustained rise in the pressure gradient between the portal
vein and the hepatic veins, the hepatic venous pressure gradient,
above about five millimetres of mercury,
with clinically important complications appearing above ten to twelve.
It arises most often from increased resistance within a cirrhotic liver,
where fibrosis and regenerative nodules distort the sinusoids,
compounded by splanchnic arterial vasodilatation that increases inflow.
The consequences follow from the body trying to decompress the high-pressure portal
system through portosystemic collaterals. Gastro-oesophageal varices form and may
bleed catastrophically. Congestive splenomegaly causes hypersplenism with
thrombocytopenia.
Ascites develops from the combination of sinusoidal hypertension,
low albumin and splanchnic vasodilatation activating sodium and water retention,
and it may become infected as spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
The shunting of portal blood past the liver contributes to encephalopathy,
and the systemic vasodilatation produces the hyperdynamic circulation of cirrhosis
with a high cardiac output and low systemic resistance,
and ultimately hepatorenal and hepatopulmonary syndromes.
So portal hypertension is the haemodynamic heart of decompensated liver disease,
and its complications — variceal bleeding, ascites,
hypersplenism and encephalopathy — dominate the perioperative picture.
How is liver function assessed and severity graded for surgical risk?
Assessment combines tests of damage, of synthetic function and of overall reserve.
The standard liver enzymes distinguish patterns rather than measure function:
transaminases, ALT and AST, indicate hepatocellular injury,
while alkaline phosphatase and gamma-GT indicate cholestasis.
True synthetic function is better judged by the prothrombin time or INR,
which rises early, by the serum albumin, which reflects chronic function,
and by the bilirubin. For grading severity in chronic disease two scores dominate.
The Child–Pugh score combines bilirubin, albumin, INR,
ascites and encephalopathy into classes A, B and C,
and class C carries a high perioperative mortality.
The MELD score uses bilirubin, INR and creatinine in a calculated formula,
was designed to prioritise transplantation,
and predicts mortality across a range of surgery.
Dynamic tests such as indocyanine green clearance measure functional flow and
reserve but are little used.
The practical message is that elective surgery in Child C or high-MELD patients
carries prohibitive risk and warrants specialist input,
and that the INR and bilirubin are the most useful bedside guides to reserve.
So we assess the liver along two axes — the pattern of injury and the adequacy of
function — and translate function into risk with Child–Pugh and MELD.
Why is the coagulopathy of liver disease described as 'rebalanced',
and how does that change management?
The old view was that liver disease causes a bleeding tendency because the
prothrombin time is prolonged. The modern,
rebalanced view recognises that the liver makes both pro- and anticoagulant
factors, and in liver disease both fall together.
Procoagulant factors two, seven, nine and ten decline, prolonging the INR;
but the natural anticoagulants protein C, protein S and antithrombin also fall,
and factor eight and von Willebrand factor, made outside the hepatocyte,
actually rise.
The result is a fragile new equilibrium that can tip either way — towards bleeding
or, increasingly recognised, towards thrombosis such as portal vein and deep vein
thrombosis.
The crucial practical consequence is that the INR does not reliably predict
bleeding risk in these patients and should not by itself trigger prophylactic
correction with fresh frozen plasma,
which adds volume and raises portal pressure without proven benefit.
Global tests of clot formation — viscoelastic tests such as thromboelastography or
ROTEM — give a far better picture of the actual haemostatic state and guide
targeted product use. Thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenaemia are addressed
specifically.
So we have moved from reflexively correcting a number to assessing the whole,
rebalanced system and intervening only for genuine,
demonstrated deficits or active bleeding.
Finally, how does anaesthesia affect the liver,
and how do you choose drugs in significant liver disease?
Anaesthesia reduces hepatic blood flow through several mechanisms:
a fall in cardiac output and arterial pressure, sympathetic effects,
positive-pressure ventilation raising intrathoracic pressure and impeding venous
return, and surgical traction near the porta.
Volatile agents reduce flow to differing degrees — isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane better preserve hepatic arterial flow and the buffer
response than halothane, which is now obsolete partly because of immune-mediated
halothane hepatitis.
The implication is that a marginal liver can be tipped into ischaemic injury,
so we maintain perfusion pressure, normocapnia and cardiac output.
In drug choice, the altered pharmacology is key:
reduced protein binding raises free fraction;
an increased volume of distribution from ascites and oedema may need a larger
loading dose; reduced clearance and shunting prolong elimination,
so maintenance doses are reduced and intervals lengthened.
I would favour drugs independent of hepatic metabolism — atracurium or
cisatracurium, cleared by Hofmann elimination, for muscle relaxation; remifentanil,
cleared by plasma esterases, for opioid; and cautious, titrated propofol.
I would avoid or minimise long-acting benzodiazepines and morphine,
given encephalopathy risk, and watch glucose and coagulation.
So anaesthesia threatens hepatic perfusion and faces deranged kinetics,
and the safe course is to protect flow and choose organ-independent drugs.
Explain hepatorenal and hepatopulmonary syndromes.
Both are organ complications of advanced liver disease driven by its circulatory
derangement. Hepatorenal syndrome is a functional,
initially reversible renal failure occurring in advanced cirrhosis with ascites,
in structurally normal kidneys.
The mechanism is the splanchnic arterial vasodilatation of portal hypertension,
which reduces effective arterial blood volume and triggers intense activation of
the renin–angiotensin and sympathetic systems;
the resulting renal vasoconstriction collapses glomerular filtration.
It presents as a rising creatinine and oliguria with a very low urinary sodium,
after exclusion of hypovolaemia and other causes, and carries a grave prognosis;
treatment is with vasoconstrictors such as terlipressin and albumin,
and ultimately transplantation.
Hepatopulmonary syndrome is the triad of liver disease,
arterial hypoxaemia and intrapulmonary vascular dilatation:
abnormally dilated pulmonary capillaries allow blood to pass without full
oxygenation, a diffusion–perfusion defect,
producing hypoxaemia that classically worsens on standing, orthodeoxia.
It is diagnosed by contrast echocardiography and again improves with
transplantation.
The anaesthetic relevance is that both signal end-stage disease,
that renal-protective strategies and avoidance of nephrotoxins and hypovolaemia
matter, and that hypoxaemia may be resistant to oxygen.
So both syndromes are extrahepatic consequences of the cirrhotic circulation — one
constricting the kidney, the other dilating the lung — and both mark very high
perioperative risk.
What is the enterohepatic circulation, and why does it matter?
The enterohepatic circulation is the cycle by which substances secreted in bile are
reabsorbed from the intestine and returned to the liver in the portal blood,
to be secreted again.
Its classic example is the bile acids: synthesised from cholesterol,
secreted into bile, used in the gut to emulsify fat,
then largely reabsorbed in the terminal ileum and recycled,
so that the modest bile-acid pool circulates several times per meal and faecal loss
is small.
The same recycling applies to bilirubin's products,
to some drugs and their conjugated metabolites,
and to substances such as urobilinogen. Its importance is several-fold.
It conserves bile acids efficiently,
so disease or resection of the terminal ileum causes bile-acid malabsorption and
fat malabsorption.
It prolongs the action of drugs that are recycled,
and conjugated drugs deconjugated by gut bacteria can be reabsorbed,
contributing to a second peak in plasma concentration;
this is one reason antibiotics that disturb gut flora can alter the effect of
recycled drugs.
It is also the basis of treatments that interrupt the cycle to enhance elimination,
such as repeated activated charcoal.
So the enterohepatic circulation recycles bile acids and certain drugs between
liver and gut, conserving the former and prolonging or complicating the kinetics of
the latter.
Contrast acute and chronic liver failure as they present to the anaesthetist.
Acute liver failure is the rapid loss of hepatic function — encephalopathy and
coagulopathy within weeks — in a patient without pre-existing chronic disease,
most often from paracetamol overdose, viral hepatitis or drug reaction.
Its defining dangers are cerebral oedema and raised intracranial pressure from the
acute ammonia load, profound coagulopathy, hypoglycaemia,
and multi-organ failure with a hyperdynamic,
vasodilated circulation resembling sepsis;
management is supportive in a specialist centre with consideration of emergency
transplantation, and any anaesthesia must protect cerebral perfusion,
maintain glucose, and treat coagulopathy and acidosis.
Chronic liver failure, by contrast,
is the decompensation of long-standing cirrhosis,
where the body has partly adapted: cerebral oedema is rare,
but the patient carries the full burden of portal hypertension — varices, ascites,
hypersplenism, hepatorenal and hepatopulmonary syndromes — the rebalanced
coagulopathy, malnutrition, and the hyperdynamic circulation,
and is graded by Child–Pugh and MELD.
The acute patient is a metabolic and neurological emergency;
the chronic patient is a complex multi-system optimisation problem with high but
more predictable risk. Both share altered drug handling,
demanding organ-independent agents, and both share sensitivity to sedation.
So acute failure threatens the brain and clotting acutely in a previously well
liver, while chronic failure presents the accumulated architectural and circulatory
complications of cirrhosis.
Briefly, tell me about bile — its composition, the role of the gallbladder,
and what happens in the critically ill liver.
Bile is the exocrine secretion of the liver, around half a litre to a litre daily,
comprising water, bile acids, phospholipids such as lecithin, cholesterol,
conjugated bilirubin, electrolytes and bicarbonate.
The hepatocytes secrete the primary bile,
and the bile-duct cells add a bicarbonate-rich fluid under the influence of
secretin. Between meals, bile is diverted to the gallbladder,
which concentrates it some five- to tenfold by absorbing water and electrolytes,
and stores it.
When fat enters the duodenum, cholecystokinin is released,
contracting the gallbladder and relaxing the sphincter of Oddi to deliver
concentrated bile for fat emulsification.
The bile acids, phospholipids and cholesterol exist in a delicate solubility
balance; when cholesterol is in excess, gallstones form.
In the critically ill, the liver suffers in two characteristic ways: hypoxic,
or ischaemic, hepatitis — the shock liver — in which a period of hypotension or
hypoxia causes centrilobular necrosis and a sharp,
transient surge in transaminases that resolves if perfusion is restored;
and cholestasis of sepsis, a functional impairment of bile secretion causing a
rising bilirubin.
Both reflect the liver's vulnerability to poor perfusion and its sentinel role in
critical illness.
So bile is a finely balanced digestive and excretory fluid stored and concentrated
by the gallbladder, and the stressed liver declares itself through ischaemic
hepatitis and cholestasis.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The liver is the central metabolic organ:
carbohydrate (stores/releases glucose, gluconeogenesis — regulates blood glucose),
fat (synthesis/processing, ketones),
protein (synthesises plasma proteins — albumin + clotting factors;
converts toxic ammonia to urea); plus drug metabolism/detoxification,
bile production, and storage (glycogen, vitamins, iron).
Second, Dual blood supply (~25% of cardiac output): portal vein (majority of flow;
nutrient-rich, partly deoxygenated;
gut drainage processed first) + hepatic artery (oxygenated;
remainder) — contributing more equally to oxygen supply.
Hepatic arterial buffer response: the artery increases flow when portal flow falls.
Flow is reduced by low CO/BP, sympathetic activation, anaesthetic agents,
surgical/abdominal factors — impairing oxygenation and flow-dependent drug
clearance.
Third, Drug metabolism: phase 1 (oxidation,
cytochrome P450) + phase 2 (conjugation) convert lipid-soluble drugs to excretable
water-soluble products (usually inactivating).
Clearance of highly-extracted drugs is flow-dependent;
enzymes are inducible/inhibitable (interactions);
impaired in liver disease → prolonged drug effects, reduced doses.
Fourth, Bile: produced continuously, stored/concentrated in the gallbladder;
bile salts essential for fat digestion/absorption; a route of excretion.
Bilirubin (haemoglobin breakdown product) — unconjugated (insoluble,
albumin-bound) is taken up, conjugated (water-soluble), excreted in bile.
Jaundice pattern localises cause: unconjugated (overproduction/uptake-conjugation
failure) vs conjugated (excretion/obstruction). 5.
Liver disease — anaesthetic consequences (each from a lost function):
low albumin + coagulopathy (impaired synthesis);
hypoglycaemia + prolonged drug effects (impaired metabolism);
encephalopathy (ammonia accumulation); jaundice;
and in cirrhosis portal hypertension (variceal bleeding), ascites,
and a disturbed (often hyperdynamic) circulation affecting kidneys/lungs — a
considerable anaesthetic challenge.
Thank you. That concludes the station.